 My dear brothers and sisters in Islam, Alhamdulillah على نعمة ال Islam, Alhamdulillah الذي هدانا للهذا وما كنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا لنا Every Friday in every khutbah you hear these three verses being repeated being repeated and recited for you and each one of them is revolving around the concept of taqwa is revolving around the concept of taqwa this is the tradition of our beloved Prophet Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam he used to recite these three verses And he used to recite them not just in khutbah of Jumu'ah but in other occasions as well. Attaqwa. What is Attaqwa? Taqwa is mentioned many, many times in the Quran, emphasized many, many places in the hadith of the Prophet. But listen to this definition of Attaqwa given by Imam Ali radiallahu anhu wa karramallahu wujah. التقوى, he said, رضي الله عنه, الخوف من الجليل. والعمل ب التنزيل والاستعداد ل يوم الرحيل. التقوى is الخوف من الجليل. To be truly having خوف and khashiyah, fear and reverence from Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala. Because that will have a positive result. In our behavior. Allah revealed Al Quran to be practiced, to be recited, to be understood, and to be the one that governs our behavior. What is halal is halal, what is haram is haram according to the teaching of the Quran. What is right and what is wrong is only according to the teaching of the Quran. Al amal bi tanzil. و الثالث و الإستعداد ل يوم الرحيل و الأستعداد ل يوم الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل و الرحيل When your time of departure comes, you have no choice. You have to go. So, Al Istidad uliyomir Rahil. This is one of the definitions of Taqwa. And this is the one that is given by Al Imam Ali radiallahu anhu. Al Imam Ali radiallahu anhu is known for some advices and some speeches. And I'm going to share with you today one of his advices, one of his very very wise words that summarize many aspects of the deen. It is reported that Imam Ali said the following, احفظوا عني خمسا لو شددتم اليها المطايا لم تظفرو بمثلها. احفظوا عني خمسا لو شددتم اليها المطايا لم تظفرو بمثلها. Take from me five items of wisdom. If you were to travel to get the like of them, you will not be able to do so. And subhanAllah, look to this beautiful introduction from someone who is a leader, someone who was brought up in the household of Rasulullah as a child. He grew up. in the household of Rasulullah so he was drinking he was drinking from the source the source of hikmah he was drinking from the source of hikmah his mind was shaped around the hikmah of Rasulullah so I am not surprised that what he speaks is also hikmah so he is telling us with confidence He is telling us with confidence because he has a علم. He is speaking with confidence because he experienced many difficulties in his life. With Rasulullah as a Sahabi Mujahid and after Rasulullah , and the history of what Ali went through is very well known. Yet, that history, there is so much of it. That actually is being contaminated. It's being contaminated. So many things are attributed to Ali that they may not be his speeches. So many actions that are attributed to Ali that may not be his actions. But what Ali is, Ali is judged according to the Quran of the Sunnah. Rasulullah. This beloved man that Rasulullah told us that I love him and whoever loves him is a mu'min. Whoever doesn't love him is not a mu'min. So Ali , just like Abu Bakr, just like Umar, they became the criterion, the reference to judge who is a mu'min or who is not. Because those were the great Sahaba around Rasulullah who Defended him, protected him, took care of him and supported him to deliver his message. So let's see, we are not going to talk about the history of Ali, maybe that will be another occasion, but we would like to see what is this wisdom that Ali would like to share with us. That to the extent he told us, If you were to travel, you will not get the like that. What is this? يا علي يا علي رضي الله عنه listen to this he said, اولا This is the first one None of you believers, none of you should have hope except in his Lord Allah Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'ala This is Tawheed, my dear brothers and sisters. This is from the man who is a Muwahid, a person who knows Allah Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'ala. A person who is following the footsteps of his beloved Prophet Muhammad Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'ala. So he's telling us don't have Raja, hope, except in Allah Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'ala. Because he is Al-Hablul Mateen, he is the pillar. You may have hope in so many people, but how many people let you down? Whether willingly or unwillingly, because they are human beings. They have limitation, no matter what. A ruler, a king, a rich man, no matter what. Yes, they may promise you something. They may would like to give you something. They may would like to help you with something. But maybe Allah did not decree that's going to happen to you. It will not happen. Have hope in anyone you want. If you don't have hope in Allah , things will not happen. So please keep that in mind. This is the pillar. This is the pillar of Tawheed that is Arraja Fillah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala wa Laisa Filayri. Don't we have hope that other people may help us? Yes, we do. Because we live in a practical life. However, that hope is always tied to the hope in Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. That it is, if it is not permitted by Allah, therefore it will not happen. In that case, my real hope is in Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. الرجاء في الله subhanahu wa ta'ala. So that is the first one. What is the second one, يا imam? What is the second one that you would like to convey to us? He said, وَلَا يَخَافَنَّا أَحَدُكُمْ إِلَّا ذَنْبَهُ And let one of you not to be afraid of anything except one thing. Be fearful, be always concerned and alert with one thing. What is it? Your sin. Because your sins have consequences. My sins, when I disobey Allah , I should be concerned. Because my disobedience has consequences. And therefore, I have to be concerned and worried. I have to be constantly in istighfar. Regardless of whatever, what is the sin? Is it small, is it big? Is it major, is it minor? لأنه لا كبيرة مع استغفار ولا صغيرة مع إسرار. This is the rule. لا كبيرة مع استغفار. If you have a real tawbah, a sincere tawbah, true استغفار, Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala inshallah will forgive you. Be sincere in your seeking of forgiveness. Do what it takes to get that forgiveness. Make a sincere tawbah and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala promised. That he will forgive. Allah promised that he will forgive except the one who comes with shirk. The one who comes to him, disbelieving in him, associating with him another partner, Allah said there is no forgiveness for such a person. Less than that, it's up to Allah Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'A'la if we do what we have to do, if we fulfill the requirements, Allah Subh'anaHu Wa Ta'ala Insha'Allah Wa Ta'ala will forgive. So therefore, even if there is a major sin, Allah is always asking us to come back. Come back! Come back to me. Where are you going to go? But that requires I should be fearful. I should have with that hope in the forgiveness of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala I should always have fear and concerns about the consequences of my own sins because that kind of feeling will make me stop the wrong things that I am doing that kind of feeling will make me always connected to my Creator because I need Him to forgive me that kind of feeling will make me Always alert and aware of my behavior that it should be a positive behavior, something beneficial to me and to the rest of the people. But if I go and commit sins and I have no concern, I have no fear that I may be punished because of my sins, therefore I will create chaos on earth. Therefore I'm not fulfilling the purpose behind my creation to be a khalifa of Allah on this earth. So the second one my dear brothers and sisters as beautiful wisdom from Imam Ali , Don't fear others, don't fear other things, fear your sin. Because if you do, there will be a change in your life and in mine. Number three, something very practical. وَلَا يَسْتَحْيِي أَحَدُكُمْ إِذَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ أَنْ يَتَعَلَّمْ And one of you should not be shy if he doesn't know to go and seek knowledge. And the Imam Ali is known to be knowledgeable. He was a reservoir of knowledge. As a matter of fact, it is reported that he used to say, There is a lot of knowledge over here. But I don't find qualified people to carry it. And especially this is being said towards the latest of his times when he faced so many challenges. هنا علمٌ There is a lot of knowledge over here. And of course, he got a lot of knowledge. He was taught a lot of knowledge like the great Sahaba, like Abu Bakr and Ali and Umar and Uthman and others Learned so much of the knowledge of the Prophet , they were fuqaha , they were jurists , they were references in all fields of ilm. So, yes, so he's advising us. One of you should not be shy to seek knowledge if we don't know. Because there are two things that will make someone unable or not liking, doesn't want to seek knowledge. Two things. What are they? One of them, as he said, هيا. هيا. Some people don't want to appear that they are asking a question, so people will look at them, how come you don't know this? So they don't want to appear that they don't know. But there is another thing which is very dangerous: كبر. Some of us maybe are arrogant to ask to know that which they don't know. Some people maybe are so arrogant not to come to a class so they will be able to learn or to go to someone and ask about something that they don't know. Yet Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala directly in the Quran said فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُم لا تَعْلَمُونَ فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُم لا تَعْلَمُونَ Go and ask the people of knowledge if you don't know. And we do that in all fields of our life. All fields of our life, there are so many things we don't know. If you are not a doctor, you don't pretend to be a doctor. Go to the doctor so he or she will be able to treat you and tell you what is right and what is wrong. If you are not satisfied with that doctor, maybe you can go to another doctor. Same thing with engineering, same thing with all fields of life. But yet, when it comes to the field of deen, there are many people who everybody thinks that he or she They know. My dear brothers and sisters, we need to seek knowledge. Our deen is about knowledge. Don't we know that the first word that was revealed to the Prophet is اقرأ، read. So we have to seek knowledge. طلب العلم فريضة على كل المسلمين. Seeking knowledge is an obligation upon every Muslim. We should be a nation. A nation of knowledge, a nation of seeking knowledge. When studies are being done about the Muslim Ummah, especially certain areas, certain regions, certain countries, we are in the bottom. We are in the bottom of those who write books. We are in the bottom of those who read books. That's not us. That's not how the Muslims were. The Muslims were teaching the entire world about knowledge. And spreading knowledge everywhere to the Muslim and to the non Muslim. How do you think the Renaissance came to be the Renaissance? It's on the shoulders of what the Muslims have achieved in Andalusia, in Baghdad, in many places. So, something wrong happened to this Ummah that we are not behaving the way we used to behave. So, Imam Ali , just like many of the teachers, Before they emphasized on the importance of seeking knowledge, my dear brothers and sisters. Number four, which is related as well. وَإِذَا سُئِلَ عَمَّا لَا يَعْلَمْ أَن يَقُولَ لَا أَعْلَمْ. And if a person is being asked about something he or she doesn't know, it's very simple: I don't know. I don't know. And that was the behavior of our scholars. الإمام مالك رضي الله عنه وما أدراكا الإمام مالك الإمام مالك he was the scholar of his time it used to be said لا يفتى ومالك في المدينة لا يفتى ومالك في المدينة No one will dare to give a fatwa if الإمام مالك is around Imam مالك was a reference People used to go from Andalusia from Spain all the way to المدينة to ask الإمام مالك questions From North Africa. Why? Because Imam Malik used to be a reference. Imam Dari al Hijrah, that's the title that he earned. Yet, Imam Malik was asked so many questions and he answered many of them. He said, لا أدري. There was a person who came all the way, I believe, from Andalusia or from North Africa and he traveled so much to ask him a few questions that were Collected from the area where he came from. He answered some of them, but some of them he said, لا أدري. He said, يا Imam, I came all the way to ask you these questions and you're telling me I don't know. He said, When you go back to the people, tell them, and Imam Malik said, I don't know. Because this is tawadu'. This is tawadu'. This is modesty. This is modesty. So, Imam Ali is teaching us a principle. That yes, you may be knowledgeable in certain areas, but there may be some other areas where you don't have that knowledge. So, therefore, there is nothing wrong saying, I don't know. So, the fifth one. What is number five, Ya Imam? He said, رضي الله عنه:. فإن الصبر من الإيمان كالرأس من الجسد فمن لا صبر له لا إيمان له He said the fifth one is being patient. Being steadfast. Being patient. Being steadfast. For the parable of صبر, being patient, compared to إيمان, faith is like the head to the body. The head is being patient, the body is iman. If there is no patience, then there is no body. If there is no sabr, there is no iman. That's how important it is to be patient. To be patient in seeking knowledge, to be patient in front of challenges, to be patient when you want change, to be patient when you are working with your brothers and sisters, to be patient in your family, to be patient with your kids, to be patient with your spouse, to be patient in learning learning takes a lot of work so therefore الصبر is حكمة الصبر being patient is a key so again five five beautiful pieces of wisdom the first one the first one is saying arrajah to be always having hope in Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala the second one is to fear our sins because our sins have consequences The third one is to seek knowledge. And the fourth one, if we don't know, we say we don't know and we try to know. And the fifth one is to be patient.